Local
As homicides fall in D.C., rise in Prince George’s, numbers meet in the middle
By Allison Klein and Matt Zapotosky
1325381872000
<strong>Correction:</strong> An earlier version of this article misstated the Prince George’s County Police Department’s homicide closure rate for 2011. The rate was 66 percent, not 63 percent. In addition, because of incomplete information provided by Fairfax County police, the article and an accompanying graphic misstated the number of homicides in that county. There were 11, not eight. The number for Prince William County was also incorrect; it included two cases that were ruled justified. That county had four criminal homicides, according to police, not six. And D.C. police say that one of the 109 homicides recorded in the city in 2011 will be considered a 2012 case because the medical examiner did not issue a ruling until Jan. 1. This version has been corrected.
The District and Prince George’s County had nearly the same number of homicides in 2011, a major departure from a high 20 years ago, when the city saw 325 more slayings than the county.
It is a shift that reflects a <a href="http://crimemap.dc.gov/presentation/report.asp">double-digit drop</a> in killings in the District from 2010 to 2011, with an especially noticeable downward trend in the most stubborn crime zones east of the Anacostia River. Just across the border, though, the homicide count in the neighboring communities in Prince George’s is surging, and the county as a whole saw a slight increase last year.
There were 97 slayings in Prince George’s in 2011, four more killings than in 2010. In the District, the year saw 108 homicides, down from 132 in 2010 and the lowest homicide total in the city since 1963.
“We share many of the same issues,” said D.C. Police Chief Cathy L. Lanier. “Quite a few of our victims come from Prince George’s County.”
The police department’s 7th District east of the Anacostia River — neighborhoods including Barry Farm and Congress Heights — saw its annual homicide count drop 55 percent, with 24 fewer killings in 2011. Neighborhoods across the border in Prince George’s 4th District — including Hillcrest Heights and Oxon Hill-Glassmanor — saw their count more than double, up by 21 slayings.
Law enforcement officials said the trend along the Prince George’s border reflects problems that migrated with those who left the District for inside-the-Beltway county neighborhoods, including issues connected with poverty and long-simmering neighborhood disputes.
Some D.C. residents who still see frequent violence in their neighborhoods are weary, and say there’s not much to celebrate in the city’s declining homicide numbers.
“I’m slow to get too excited,” said the Rev. Donald Isaac, executive director of the <a href="http://www.ercpcp.org/home0.aspx">East of the River Clergy, Police, Community Partnership</a>. “As soon as you begin to celebrate, it can reverse so quickly.”
Prince George’s Police Chief Mark Magaw said crime has long run “back and forth” between the District and Prince George’s, and he has pushed this year for increased cooperation between the two police departments.
